Week One: Clark and Jenkins, Historiographical Overview

What is history?  Is there a “correct” way to view and interpret the past?  That depends whom you ask.  These are the central issues in the first chapter of Elizabeth Clark’s History, Theory, Text and in Keith Jenkins’ Re-thinking History.  Clark gives us an introduction to the many different methods.  There’s Leopold von Ranke and his focus on primary source documents as the main source of information and there’s Friedrich Nietzsche’s belief that the constant strive for objectivity actually trivialized the past to fit the present.  Wilhelm Dilthey, on the other hand, believed that there must be some judgment at play when formulating an interpretation.  Then there’s presentism, objectivism, realism, and countless other methods to interpreting the past.  So, which method is correct?

That’s just it, there isn’t really one best method.  The term “history” isn’t even what we think it is.  The past and history are different things, with the past being everything that has previously happened everywhere and history being what has been recorded about the past (pg. 7).  This distinction is vital to understand and it’s represented by the fact that many minority groups have been left out of histories (their side has been left out, that is), but their existence has not necessarily been excluded from the past.  Jenkins also argues that it is impossible to know everything that’s ever occurred because it’s always changing; it is always a subjective, personal construct (which is really convenient for some people and groups).  Going back to the original question then, is there a best method, I personally would agree with Jenkins that there isn’t.  Ideology really is a huge (and very powerful) factor in determining the most appropriate method for a historian, because the question really is “who is history for?”  I think this is one of the most important and interesting points made in the book.  The answer to that question determines everything, such as the methodology used, the epistemology telling us what can be known, and the ideologies influencing the conclusions made.  

I also found Jenkins’ point on the nonexistence of centers of issues really interesting because the center of the spectrum is always relative and never the true “center” (pg. 57).  It is true that it’s very difficult (Jenkins stated it was impossible) to really empathize with the people we are studying in the past because the lens through which we are looking has been influenced by our experiences of living in the modern world.  All of these are things that I hadn’t considered before.

I agree to some extent that truth does elude us because it is impossible to know what really happened since we were not there (even then, those accounts would be influenced by our own personal beliefs).  On the other hand, even with biases, I do believe it is possible to try to be objective if we can talk to the person who was directly involved in the past event (say, a WWII veteran).  I think that to spend too much time thinking that it’s pointless to strive for objectivity because it’s never objective to some degree defeats the purpose of studying history.  We study history for practical reasons, whether to educate others in academia or to make sense of past decisions to help guide us in the future.  Historians have to make those calls as a part of their job, so while we may never know for certain, we can still learn a great deal from the past and help future generations understand it.  Even though I somewhat agree on the elusion of the truth, I disagree that there are no facts in studying history.  Of course there are facts, such as dates.  The meaning of past events cannot be based on facts naturally, but that makes sense.  

Honestly, I was surprised at how interesting I found these readings.  I really dislike philosophy in general, but Jenkins made a lot of really valuable points that should be considered.  Having an awareness will certainly benefit myself and others in studying history in the future.  The simple takeaway is that there isn't one correct or best way to view something.  That's part of what makes history so interesting.  
