Jenkins' discussion of sources/traces in *Rethinking History* only focuses on two extreme positions, ignoring a wide swath of alternative or moderate positions (where I feel most historians actually reside and practice), and weakens his ultimate prescriptions for how to do history in a post-modern era. 

Jenkins primarly attacks historians who believe in objectivity and seek a "real" or "true" account of history. He contrasts that with his stance, multiple, positioned histories constructed by historians. The former believe that there are inate meanings in facts, sources, traces, Jenkins that meaning comes entirely from the historian not the text. "Does this evidence of the past press itself so irresistibly upon the historian that he/she can do no other than allow it to speak for itself, as Elton has sugguested, or does evidence, construed now as an absolutely mute resource, need to be quite literally articulated by the hisorian who, in putting his or her own voice over the evidence *per se*, effectively silences it." (Jenkins 58) I am with Jenkins and his critique of Elton and others who believe there is a truth in the past or in objectivity. Sources/traces can have multiple meanings to historians coming at them from different situations, ideologies. But I think Jenkins is making to big of a logical jump to say "sources are mute" (46) or "that the past itself, in some sort of pre-discursive way, quite literally 'doesn't have a say in it.'" (60) This implies that there are no limits from within the source itself constraining how a historian can use that source. But just we have established that a text doesn't have only one meaning, doesn't prove there are no limits.

But as historians, we do run into limits and constraints of how we can use our sources. Jenkins touches on this briefly. "There is no method of establishing incorrigible meanings; all facts to be meaningful need embedding in interpretive readings that obviously contain them but which do not simply somehow arise from them." (Jenkins 41) He does not expand on this "obvious" point, but he should. How exactly are facts contained in an interpretation? What are the criteria for including or excluding a fact in our interpretation? For example, in the fall of 1911, California gave women suffrage and Christy Mathewson led baseball with 26 wins and a 1.99 ERA. We probably could come to a consensus that baseball stats would be, at best, very difficult to incorporate in a history of suffrage. But why? Is there something inate in baseball stats limiting their usefulness, or is it something that we impose on the stat, like our logical systems, or beliefs of cause and effect (which Jenkins attempts to "problematicise" also on 60-3). Jenkins denies anything inate in the fact, but doesn't analyze other factors for how we "contain" these facts in our interpretations, how we determine their usefulness, etc, which would stregnthen his claim that "sources are mute."

An alternative that I am touching on and I wish Jenkins would have engaged with is Michael Oakeshott's statement in Clark' "The historical fact must be recognized not as 'what really happened,' but as 'what the evidence obliges us to believe.'" (Clark 19) Like Jenkins, Oakeshott denies attempts for true knowledge of a real past. Oakeshott gives power to the sources while still acknowledging that history is created by historians.

In the final chapter, Jenkins mentions two extremes of history, "authorized history" and "post-modern pastlessness," and suggests a path between the two where "as many people(s) as possible [can] make their own histories such that they can have real effects in the world." (80) Great. Mute sources are not a necessary condition for this though. There is no reason that the belief that sources can have multiple but limited meanings is not compatable with this multiple histories ideal. Furthermore, Jenkins mentions that histories can be "abused". (78) If sources are mute, and there is no truth or accuracy, how do we identify and resist these abuses? 
