**Jenkins, Clark Readings**
	
The German Romantic writer Novalis wrote in the late eighteenth century that “philosophy is properly homesickness; the need to be everywhere at home.” (Footnoting inText Edit?) This sentiment came to mind more than once during this week’s readings when considering the polemical nature of historiography in the late twentieth century.  The first time was in Elizabeth A. Clark’s *History, Theory, Text*, when Clark quotes Clifford Geertz dryly explaining to critics of cultural relativism “if we wanted home truths, we should have stayed at home.” (Clark, 24)  And again later, in Keith Jenkins’ *Rethinking History*, when he argues against the employment of empathy in historical writing: “The only way to bring people in the past (who were so different to us) under our control is to make them the same as us, propelled everywhere by rational calculation, liberal style.” (Jenkins, 55)  In the context of these quotes, traditional historians are accused not of actually philosophizing—on the contrary—but of discomfort with new techniques within the academy, and an inclination to remain in the safety of their time honored methods.  These statements both articulate a common sentiment within postmodernism disparaging those who would seek a rational order in an irrational world.  

I bring up the Novalis aphorism because it was born of a romantic reaction against Enlightenment order, and what its author saw as the “logical illness” (Pinkard, 147) of an over-orderly system in philosophy, and because it may shed some light on our readings for the week.  Certain conceptual approaches are scoffed at from Jenkins’ postmodern vantage point, as they have been passed down from the Enlightenment which, as we know from reading *Rethinking History* is a discredited meta narrative. Clark agrees: “In short, the historical profession (has become) mired in scientific and literary paradigms that were rapidly being abandoned by practitioners of those disciplines.” (Clark, 17)  Jenkins’ eventual definition of history deems historians perpetually beholden to structures of power in what is “a shifting, problematic discourse.” (Jenkins, 31)  For him, the order sought by traditional historians does not exist, indeed has never existed, and is a self-defeating illusion.  But all is not lost: recognition of the lack of structure in the universe can be liberating, and acknowledgment that all history is “history for someone” creates space to get down to true history writing!  Jenkins seems to want historians to do better: to be liberated by his ideas, to explore the possibilities of creating histories within a “de-centered” world, to embrace homesickness, perhaps.  

Yet with his attack on empathy he takes away some of their methodological tools to do so.  For here is the rub: if it is true that there is no objective truth, that all “truths” are constructed to serve power blocs or special interests, then it follows that *socially constructed* truths *do* exist, and that they might thus be studied with some benefit.  Why, then, the hostility towards empathy?  Jenkins devotes a section of chapter 3 to a thorough denunciation of empathy in historical studies.  Yet any form of cultural relativism (which Jenkins would approve of) would seem utterly steeped in and dependent upon a methodology employing empathy.  The term itself is empathetic in nature.  As Clark herself notes, Claude Lévi-Strauss felt that cultural relativism was “one of the foundations of cultural anthropology.” (24)  Further, any textbook on sociological theory will privilege Max Weber’s concept of *Verstehen*, or an empathetic understanding of human behavior.  Why is it thus okay for archaeologists and sociologists to employ empathy in their work, but it is off limits to historians?  This seems hypocritical of Jenkins, if not postmodernists in general, who have effectively poisoned the well of methodological inquiry.   

Geertz’s quip that “no one need worry that reality is going to go away unless we believe really hard in it” (in Clark 24) is a terrific example of the postmodern attitude.  Clark then extends this sentiment to “traditional historians who worry that their discipline may vanish if they abandon epistemological positivism, correspondence theories of verification, objectivism, and anti-relativism.” (Clark, 25)  Ouch.  Fortunately, such definitions are now rather dated from *Rethinking History* (1991) and *History, Theory, Text” (2004).  Subsequent historians *have* taken such criticism to heart, employing theoretical approaches into their work to cast new light on their subject matter.  In fact, such historians would seem to have gone beyond postmodernists, who may have been effectively stopped by their own limitations in not writing history, literature or theory too closely resembling a meta narrative.  How unexpected it would be if contemporary historians have moved on and grown from 1991 in ways in which the postmodernists have not.  It would mean that the unassailable position of postmodernism is irrelevant now in the same way as historical objectivism was, for them, previously.  Oh, the ironies of history.  

Sorry for the footnoting trouble!  The quotes from von Hardenberg (Novalis) were taken from Terry Pinkard’s *German Philosophy 1760-1860: The Legacy of Idealism* Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2002
