**Response to Jenkins and Clark**

As someone who previously never frequently encountered, or even really found interesting, the study of history theory, I found Clark’s early synthesis and Jenkins’ examination of what history ‘really is’ in *Re-thinking History* enormously helpful both in summarizing the ideas currently being batted around by scholars, and in getting me far more interested in the more theoretical, philosophical side of the field.

Not only that, but I have seen how applicable and relevant the issues addressed by Jenkins have been to my own studies all this time, before I even read his work. 
Jenkins’ repeatedly addressed question, “Who is history for?” (22) has been ever-relevant in my own studies. Jenkins’ examination of this process of who history is written for, including all of those outside factors that influence every stage of a history’s production and consumption (28-29), is indicative of my own experience, even in the typically considered ‘traditional’ field of military history. From a general history of an entire war, to a more specified historical examination of a single action, to a unit history, to a personal memoir from an individual in that unit, to that unit’s appearance in the correspondence or official histories of the enemy side; a single examined military unit can go from non-existent to vital, from virtuous to villainous, and not just over the course of many years, but at times in concurrent, competing accounts. And, as Jenkins made clear, it perhaps being an ‘official’ unit history of course does not make it necessarily the truth about that unit (35). Just as in Victor’s example from Arizona, it may very well be truth for some, but for whom, and why, is that unit depicted as such? This variety in viewpoints regarding the example of military units can indeed lead to that same dangerous slope of history Clark addresses, sliding “‘into fiction, Holocaust deniers will rise up everywhere, and we will have to fight the Second World War all over again’” (23). It can be seen in the struggle over how to depict units or individuals in military studies, especially as the public and indeed some historians can tend to view wars and conflicts as ‘good vs. bad’ and be biased to favor a certain depiction of each combatant. This is becoming a scary reality as of late with the Japanese government's supposed attempts at adjusting the history of its military's actions regarding the Rape of Nanking. This leads directly into what interested me most about Jenkins’ book. 

What interested me greatly, similar to Kevin J., was the issue of empathy. Perhaps unexpectedly to those outside of it, empathy is an issue with important significance in the field of military history. Like Kevin, I tended to disagree with Jenkins in that empathy with historical individuals or groups is entirely impossible (51), for many of the same reasons Kevin J. already addressed. However, while I do disagree with the total impossibility of it due to the tools at our disposal, the difficulty of empathizing with someone from the past spoke directly to me, as I am sure it would to many other military historians. This alludes to that “philosophical problem” addressed by Jenkins of “whether it is possible to enter into the mind of another person…”(48). This is where I do agree with Jenkins that it may be impossible. The prominent military historian John Keegan addressed in several of his books this largest of gulfs to attempt to cross: how can someone who has never seen or been in combat accurately, appropriately, and indeed respectfully, enter the mind of someone who has and depict the experience? It is a question of empathy constantly addressed by military historians, and one in which it seems to be widely accepted, by historians and veterans alike, that the only way to ever truly know what combat is like to have been in it, and thus those who study military and have not seen combat, like myself, can only get so close in our examinations and depictions. Jenkins would see this as a prime example of his stance that it is indeed impossible. While I agree, I think it has wider significance than just that. It might be impossible, and I understand Jenkins’ concerns about chasing something that will not happen, but I worry this will discourage historians from trying to get as close as they can. Especially in certain fields of history where the severity of the experience, or exclusivity of those who have experienced it dictates a need to get as close as possible to empathy to do the subject justice; while, as Keegan does, acknowledging that at a fundamental level, it is indeed impossible so as to not disrespect or trivialize the experience as something that can be truly understood by anyone—like combat. 

Points from Keegan are drawn from:

John Keegan, *The Face of Battle: A Study of Agincourt, Waterloo, and the Somme.* Jonathan Cape Ltd., The Penguin Group, 1976, 1978. 

John Keegan, *The Price of Admiralty: The Evolution of Naval Warfare.* Century Hutchinson, Ltd., The Penguin Group, 1988, 1989.
