As an outsider to the discipline of history, I found Jenkins’s approach to history an excellent introduction to the study. What struck me the most throughout the book was his absolute rejection of a dogmatic approach to reading the past. Jenkins writes:

>For if it were possible to know once and for all, now and for ever, then there would be no need for any more history to be written, for what would be the point of countless historians saying it all over again in the same way? History (historical constructions not ‘the past/future’) would stop, and if you think that the idea of stopping history (historians) is absurd it really isn’t: stopping history is not only part of Orwell’s 1984 for example, but a part of European experience in the 1930s – the more immediate time and place that made Orwell consider it (13).

It hadn’t occurred to me before that the problem with propaganda as history wasn’t the separation between what had *really* happened in the past and what is written as *history* (Jenkins admits that even in what can more properly be called *history*, the past and history “are ages and miles apart” (7).) The problem with propaganda seems to be the absolute certainty of the approved written history as 100 percent unquestionable truth. This makes it more dangerous, and Jenkins’s example (1930’s Europe) is all the example we need of this. To me, this makes reading authorized North Korean history suddenly less amusing. Whereas before it might have been funny to hear of the North Korean historian reporting as historical fact Kim Jong-il’s miraculous birth, his superhuman golf scores, etc. (the distance between the past and history in these narratives was amusing to me), the “stopping” of history that accompanies it—the impossibility for the audience of such a history to question or reexamine the narrative—should actually be alarming. I believe I’m not reading too much into Jenksins’s argument to say that he is steering the historian toward the responsibility of preventing dogmatic approaches to history from taking root. (Of course, Jenkins wouldn’t say this explicitly—throughout the books, he seems more interested in setting the boundaries of his discipline, and rather than tell the historian what to do, directs the historian to accept the limitations of what they may *not* do.)

I’m not sure I completely accept Jenkins’s conclusion that it is impossible to empathize with the past. Jenkins posits that there is too great a difference between the language of the past and the present to make truly empathizing with the past impossible (53). I wonder, though, if a misunderstanding of past language on the part of a present-day historian is inexcusable anymore. We certainly have the tools in the English language (and others) to have a fairly reasonable understanding of how words have changed meaning over time, and I worry that Jenkins’s approach to the problem might encourage historians from abandoning hope. Jenkins worries about such problems elsewhere (because he focuses on what historians may not do, he constantly worries he’s discouraging the historian from even beginning), so I wish this was something Jenkins would have addressed more. I accept the limitations of tools like the *Oxford English Dictionary*, the *Deutches Wörterbuch* and other historical dictionaries, but I think they may help us at least approach an empathy that Jenkins worries is entirely unattainable. To me, overcoming the biases that Jenkins warns us against allows us to reasonably empathize with the past, and empathizing with the pass helps to overcome our biases (pardon my redundancy here-I really believe it works both ways). For example, Leslie Lockett’s book *Anglo-Saxon Psychologies* uses language in its historical context to overcome what she calls the medievalist bias (that everyone and everything in the middle ages agrees with and was influenced by Saint Augustine) and the modernist bias (that people in the past were dumb-dumbs compared to us). She even uses the same example as Jenkins’s sunrise/sunset comment (36) in order to explain how language can move from literal to metaphorical, but we may find contextual clues to help us interpret how the language was being used by a specific writer at a specific time.
