

**Looking at Jenkins and Clark**

For citations, (J, 32) means Jenkins, page 32, as (C,24) means Clark, page 24


Since around 2006 there has been a (successful) battle in Arizona to remove Ethnic Studies from the curriculum of the Tucson Unified School district.  Arizona Superintendent of Public Instruction (2001-2011) and Arizona Attorney General (2011-2015) Tom Horne headed the battle claiming, "It's propagandizing and brainwashing that's going on there [in the Ethnic Studies program]."[1]  This reminds me of Jenkins, who posits that for those in power making alternative narratives seems subversive (J, 79).  And so we're introduced into the debate of truth, which both Jenkins and Clark take to task.  In their own ways, each author argues that knowing the truth of the past is unachievable due to subjectivity.

I am particularly fond of Clark's section on relativism (C, 23-25) and Jenkins' last chapter, "Doing History in the Post-Modern World" (J, 70-84).  What pulled me to Jenkins last chapter is it not only succinctly summed up his previous chapters, it informed me to the present context of post-modernism, and how it arrived.  Of particular interest was Jenkins channeling the cultural critic Tony Bennett when he remarked the present "is where all history starts from and returns to" (J, 81).  My professional interest in history is first and foremost concerned with the present moment.  As such, to hear Jenkins--who I am quite fond of after reading *Re-thinking History*--make that claim, I felt validated, which means I can continue my work with a good confidence.  After all, we cannot write on something which has no space to be birthed into--which speaks to location.  Where are you located within the academy?  One of Jenkins main arguments/points is that, "the question becomes not 'what is history?' but '*who is history for*?'" (J, 22, emphasis mine).  You must be writing on something someone wants to publish.  Is there away to combine the history you want to write with the history that publishers will publish?  For me, Jenkins and Clark argue the space I want to write in exists.


Equally of personal interest and importance, Clark sounds the bells (as did Jenkins) of feeling hopeless within the post-modern era.  According to Clark's reading of the charges of skeptics of post-modernism, all will be "lost, history will slide into fiction, Holocaust deniers will rise up everywhere, and we will have to fight the Second World War all over again" (C, 23).  I've felt this way!  However, Jenkins provides a possible way out: writing histories "of an experimental kind *beyond* the limits of the academic *genre*" can lead to "emancipation and empowerment" (J, xix, emphasis in text).  In line with the Ethnic Studies issue I opened this post with, Jenkins posits that "those with the most power distribute and legitimate knowledge" and therefore choose which histories are "legitimate" (J, 31).  Obviously Tom Horne, a person of power, does not think the history of Latina/os in the U.S. is legitimate, and I want to counter that.  I want to write the histories that I find and I want them to be part of the conversation that is working towards shifting the paradigm; the one that *is* arguing truth is relative, because that's what I learned after traveling around the Western world for four years probing "What is truth?"  I entered the academy with that disposition, and Clark and Jenkins have written books backing that up.  Yet after reading these authors it is still hard to shake the post-modern edginess where everything is so fluid.  So my question is: how do we find meaning when so much is devoid of it? 



[1] Lacey, Marc.  "Rift in Arizona as Latino Class Is Found Illegal."  *The New York Times*. January 7, 2011. Accessed August 25, 2015.
